Adding GraphQL Guide to the Website (#3369)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: learn/getting-started/writing-a-graphql-api-with-ballerina.md

---
layout: ballerina-language-basics-left-nav-pages-swanlake
title: Writing a GraphQL API with Ballerina

> description: This is a simple guide that walks through the steps to write a GraphQL API using Ballerina.

Reviewer: Having simple is fine right ?

> to store the case counts. More about this later.

Now that we have the design, we can create the project.

## Create a Ballerina Project

1. Open a terminal and move to the directory where you want to create the Ballerina project.

   On Linux or Mac:
    ```shell
    cd your/parent/directory/path
    ```

   On Windows:
    ```windows
    cd your\parent\directory\path
    ```
2. Using the `bal` command, create a new Ballerina project.
    ```shell
    bal new covid19
   ```
This will create a new Ballerina project inside a directory named `covid19`.

## Create a Datasource for the Project

Before writing the GraphQL service, we are going to create a data source for out project. This will mimic a database
where we store the data for our service. Use the following command to create a new module inside the Ballerina project.

```shell
bal add datasource
```

This will create a new directory named `modules/datasource`, which will be the Ballerina module acting as the data
source of the GraphQL service.

Now, let's add the data needed for the GraphQL service inside this module.

> First, we have to define our data types. We can use Ballerina records for this. Let's first define a Ballerina record to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, define the data types using Ballerina records. Let's first define a Ballerina record to
```
Rather than saying `first`, can we add these as numbered bullet points of this represents a sequence of steps/instructions?

> store an entry in the database. Although the Covid-19 database has many fields, for this guide we only use the `isoCode`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
store an entry in the database. Although the Covid-19 database has many fields, this guide uses only the `isoCode`
```
Shall we make this an `info` box?

, `continent`, `location`, `date`, `totalCases`, and `newCases`. Let's create a record with these fields.

To do so, let's create a file `types.bal` inside the `modules/datasource` directory and add the following record
definition there.

```ballerina
public type CovidEntry record {|
    readonly string isoCode;
    string country;
    decimal cases?;
    decimal deaths?;
    decimal recovered?;
    decimal active?;
|};
```

Now we need a table to store the sample data. For this tutorial, we are going to use an in-memory table with just three
entries. Let's define the table inside the auto-created `datasource.bal` file as follows:

```ballerina
isolated table<CovidEntry> key(isoCode) covidEntriesTable = table [
    {isoCode: "AFG", country: "Afghanistan", cases: 10000, deaths: 500, recovered: 1500, active: 8000},
    {isoCode: "SL", country: "Sri Lanka", cases: 20000, deaths: 1000, recovered: 4000, active: 15000},
    {isoCode: "US", country: "United States", cases: 40000, deaths: 5000, recovered: 15000, active: 20000},
]
```

> Then we can define functions to mock the database operations. Although we use an in-memory table, we can use any data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, define functions to mock the database operations. Although this guide uses an in-memory table, you can use any data
```

> source and use the same functions to access them, so that the GraphQL service will not have any impact when the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
source and use the same functions to access them so that the GraphQL service will not have any impact when the
```

datasource is changed.

> First, the following function will return all the entries from the table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, the following function will return all the entries from the table.
```
Consider adding numbered bullet points always if a sequence of steps/instructions is presented.

```ballerina
public isolated function getAllEntries() returns CovidEntry[] {
    lock {
        CovidEntry[] entriesArray = from CovidEntry entry in covidEntriesTable select entry;
        return entriesArray.cloneReadOnly();
    }
}
```

> Then another function to get an entry from the `isoCode`. This will return the `CovidEntry` record if the provided

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, another function is used to get an entry from the `isoCode`. This will return the `CovidEntry` record if the provided
```

> `isoCode` is found in the table, `nil` otherwise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`isoCode` is found in the table or `nil` otherwise.
```

```ballerina
public isolated function getEntry(string isoCode) returns CovidEntry? {
    lock {
        CovidEntry[] entries = from CovidEntry entry in covidEntriesTable where entry.isoCode == isoCode select entry;
        if entries.length() > 0 {
            return entries[0].cloneReadOnly();
        }
    }
    return;
}
```

Let's now define another function to add an entry to the table.

```ballerina
public isolated function addEntry(CovidEntry entry) {
    lock {
        covidEntriesTable.add(entry.cloneReadOnly());
    }
}
```

> > Note: A `lock` is used to access the table to make the operations concurrent-safe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** A `lock` is used to access the table to make the operations concurrent-safe.
```

> Now our data source is completed. Let's move on to writing the GraphQL service now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, as the data source is completed, let's move on to writing the GraphQL service.
```

## Write Ballerina service

As per our schema (as mentioned in the [design section]) we first have to define the `CovidData` object type. In
Ballerina GraphQL the preferred way to define output objects is to use service types.
> Note: Ballerina records can be used as output objects as well.

### Create GraphQL Object Types

> Let's create a new file named `covid_data.bal` to define this service type. Following is the definition of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's create a new file named `covid_data.bal` to define this service type. The following is the definition of the
```

`CovidData` object type.

```ballerina
import covid19.datasource as ds;

public isolated distinct service class CovidData {
    private final readonly & ds:CovidEntry entryRecord;

    isolated function init(ds:CovidEntry entryRecord) {
        self.entryRecord = entryRecord.cloneReadOnly();
    }

    isolated resource function get isoCode() returns string {
        return self.entryRecord.isoCode;
    }

    isolated resource function get country() returns string {
        return self.entryRecord.country;
    }

    isolated resource function get cases() returns decimal? {
        return self.entryRecord.cases;
    }

    isolated resource function get deaths() returns decimal? {
        return self.entryRecord.deaths;
    }

    isolated resource function get recovered() returns decimal? {
        return self.entryRecord.recovered;
    }

    isolated resource function get active() returns decimal? {
        return self.entryRecord.active;
    }
}
```

> Here, we are creating a `CovidData` service type using a `CovidEntry` record type. Then each resource function inside

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, you are creating a `CovidData` service type using a `CovidEntry` record type. Then, each resource function inside
```

this service type represents a field in the GraphQL object. The return type of the resource function is the type of the
field. Each resource function returns a field from its `CovidEntry` record.
> Note how the `decimal` type is returned from the resource functions. This will add a `Scalar`
type named `Decimal` to the GraphQL schema, which will be generated by the Ballerina GraphQL package.

### Writing the GraphQL service

> Now that we have our main data type, we can write the GraphQL service. To do this, we can use the auto-generated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, that you have your main data type, you can write the GraphQL service. To do this, we can use the auto-generated
```

`covid19.bal` file.

> First we have to import the GraphQL module, and then write a service attached to a GraphQL listener. In the following

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, import the GraphQL module, and then write a service attached to a GraphQL listener. In the following
```

> code snippet, we first import the GraphQL package, and then define a service attaching a GraphQL listener.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
code snippet, you first import the GraphQL package and then define a service attaching a GraphQL listener.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/graphql;

service /covid19 on new graphql:Listener(9000) {

}
```

In the above code snippet, the path of this service is defined as `/covid19`. If we want to host the service on the
root, we can remove the path as the following code snippet:

```ballerina
import ballerina/graphql;

service on new graphql:Listener(9000) {

}
```

> When creating the `graphql:Listener` object we need to provide the port on which it is listening to. Alternatively, an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When creating the `graphql:Listener` object, we need to provide the port to which it is listening. Alternatively, an
```

existing `http:Listener` object can also be used to initialize the `graphql:Listener` as below.

```ballerina
import ballerina/graphql;
import ballerina/http;

listener http:Listener httpListener = check new(9000);

service /covid19 on new graphql:Listener(httpListener) {

}
```

This is same as the first code snippet above, which will listen on the port `9000` and serve on `/covid19`.

> Now we can create our service methods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, create the service methods.
```

> As per our schema, there are two fields in the `Query` type. To add fields to the root `Query` type, we have to use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As per the schema, there are two fields in the `Query` type. To add fields to the root `Query` type, you have to use
```

resource methods. Each resource method inside the GraphQL service is mapped to a field in the root `Query` type.

Let's first create the `allData` field. This should return an array of `CovidData` type.

```ballerina
import ballerina/graphql;

import covid19.datasource as ds;

service /covid19 on new graphql:Listener(9000) {
    resource function get allData() returns CovidData[] {
        ds:CovidEntry[] covidEntries = ds:getAllEntries();
        return covidEntries.map(covidEntry => new CovidData(covidEntry));
    }
}
```

The resource method definition has the accessor `get`, which is used to identify the resource methods as a field of the

> `Query` type. No other accessor is allowed. Then comes the name of the field. The return type is the type of the field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Query` type. No other accessor is allowed. Then, comes the name of the field. The return type is the type of the field.
```

> If we look at the above resource method, we first retrieve the array of `CovidEntry` records from our datasource using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above resource method first retrieves the array of `CovidEntry` records from the datasource using
```

> the previously created function `getAllEntries`. Then we use ballerina `map` function on the array to create a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the previously created `getAllEntries` function. Then, the Ballerina `map` function is used on the array to create a
```

`CovidData` instance for each record, and then return the array of `CovidData`.

> Similarly, we can define another resource method to add the `filterData` field. Note that this field has an input

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, we can define another resource method to add the `filterData` field. 

>**Note:** This field has an input
```

`isoCode` to filter the data.

```ballerina
resource function get filterData(string isoCode) returns CovidData? {
    ds:CovidEntry? covidEntry = ds:getEntry(isoCode);
    if covidEntry is ds:CovidEntry {
        return new(covidEntry);
    }
    return;
}
```

In the above resource method, we define the `filterData` field in the root `Query` type. Since this field has an

> input parameter `isoCode`, we have to add an input parameter to the resource method. Then using the previously

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
input parameter `isoCode`, you need to add an input parameter to the resource method. Then, using the previously
```

> defined `getEntry` function, we can filter the relevant entry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
defined `getEntry` function, you can filter the relevant entry.
```
Please change all occurrences of `we` to `you`.

> Note: In our schema, the type of the `filterData` is `CovidData`, which is nullable. Similarly, our resource

> > method can return nil value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> method can return a nil value.
```

> Now the `Query` type is completed. We now need to define the `Mutation` type. To define mutation type, we use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the `Query` type is completed now, you need to define the `Mutation` type. To define the mutation type, use
```

`remote` methods. Similar to how each resource method is mapped to a field in the root `Query` type, each remote
method in the Ballerina GraphQL service is mapped to a field in the root `Mutation` type.

Let's define a remote method to add an entry to our datasource:

```ballerina
remote function addEntry(ds:CovidEntry entry) returns CovidData {
    ds:addEntry(entry);
    return new CovidData(entry);
}
```

This method requires a `CovidEntry` record as the input. When a remote or resource method has a record type as an
input, it will be mapped to a GraphQL input object type. This is the requirement as per the schema we have.

> The complete code for the Ballerina GraphQL service is below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The below is the complete code for the Ballerina GraphQL service:
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/graphql;

import covid19.datasource as ds;

service /covid19 on new graphql:Listener(9000) {
    resource function get allData() returns CovidData[] {
        ds:CovidEntry[] covidEntries = ds:getAllEntries();
        return covidEntries.map(covidEntry => new CovidData(covidEntry));
    }

    resource function get filterData(string isoCode) returns CovidData? {
        ds:CovidEntry? covidEntry = ds:getEntry(isoCode);
        if covidEntry is ds:CovidEntry {
            return new(covidEntry);
        }
        return;
    }

    remote function addEntry(ds:CovidEntry entry) returns CovidData {
        ds:addEntry(entry);
        return new CovidData(entry);
    }
}
```

> That's it! We can run this service now to serve a GraphQL API to our datasource. To run execute the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, you can run this service to serve a GraphQL API to our datasource. To run, execute the following command:
```

```shell
bal run
```

> Now if we connect to this service using the GraphQL Playground tool, we can see the following generated schema.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, if we connect to this service using the GraphQL Playground tool, we can see the following generated schema.
```
